Al-Khawarizmi Institute of Computer Science , ( دانش کدہَ الخوارزمی برائے کمپیوٹر سائنس) was established in August 2002 at University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore to promote research and development in various fields of Computer Science and Information Technology. It was built to conduct applied research in collaboration with various academic and industrial institutes to promote technology and development at national and international level. It has gathered many competent and highly accomplished researchers from various institutes of Pakistan
The name of institute is chosen to commemorate and pay tribute to one of the most honorable and prominent Muslim mathematician, thinker, and scholar Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī who was born in Persia and lived from 780 AD to 850 AD. Al-Khwārizmī's contribution in the field of mathematics, astronomy and geography drastically changed the paradigm of science and mathematics. He was the first one to introduce Algebra and is known as Father of Algebra. In fact, even the word "algorithm" is formed by tampering his name "Al-Khawarizmi". His mathematical concepts form the basis of the digital computer models introduced by Alan Turing and John Von Neumann.
Al-Khawarizmi Institute of Computer Science has over 200 staff members, including many with doctorates, post-graduates and graduates from the fields of computer science and engineering, information technology, embedded systems, bioinformatics, electrical and telecommunication engineering, etc. It is working on various national level research projects under the collaboration of governmental organizations like Ignite National Technology Fund, Higher Education Commission (HEC), Pakistan Science Foundation, Govt. of the Punjab, WAPDA, SNGPL and Rescue 1122. It is also playing its part in regional research development by having a strong collaboration with Asia-Pacific Telecommunity, JICA and Huawei. Besides these, Al-Khawarizmi Institute is also doing joint research projects with international organizations like Mentor Graphics, Microsoft, Global Development Network, Descon, CISCO, Amazon, Nokia and World Bank. It also has many projects under direct supervision of renowned international researchers.