Physics First is an educational program in the United States, that teaches a basic physics course in the ninth grade (usually 14-year-olds), rather than the biology course which is more standard in public schools. This course relies on the limited math skills that the students have from pre-algebra and algebra I.  With these skills students study a broad subset of the introductory physics canon with an emphasis on topics which can be experienced kinesthetically or without deep mathematical reasoning. Furthermore, teaching physics first is better suited for English Language Learners, who would be overwhelmed by the substantial vocabulary requirements of Biology. 
Physics First began as an organized movement among educators around 1990, and has been slowly catching on throughout the United States.   The most prominent movement championing Physics First is Leon Lederman's ARISE (American Renaissance in Science Education). 
Many proponents of Physics First argue that turning this order around lays the foundations for better understanding of chemistry, which in turn will lead to more comprehension of biology.  Due to the tangible nature of most introductory physics experiments, Physics First also lends itself well to an introduction to inquiry-based science education, where students are encouraged to probe the workings of the world in which they live.
The majority of high schools which have implemented "physics first" do so by way of offering two separate classes, at two separate levels: simple physics concepts in 9th grade, followed by more advanced physics courses in 11th or 12th grade.  In schools with this curriculum, nearly all 9th grade students take a "Physical Science", or "Introduction to Physics Concepts" course.  These courses focus on concepts that can be studied with skills from pre-algebra and algebra I.  With these ideas in place, students then can be exposed to ideas with more physics related content in chemistry, and other science electives.  After this, students are then encouraged to take an 11th or 12th grade course in physics, which does use more advanced math, including vectors, geometry, and more involved algebra.
There is a large overlap between the Physics First movement, and the movement towards teaching conceptual physics - teaching physics in a way that emphasizes a strong understanding of physical principles over problem-solving ability.