The Spanish Royal Physics Society (RSEF) is a non-profit institution for the branch of physical sciences resulting from the division in 1980 of the Spanish Royal Society of Physics and Chemistry (RSEFQ), founded in 1903, into the Royal Societies of Physics (RSEF) and Chemistry (RSEQ) of today. The RSEF has been officially recognised as an association of public interest. It aims to promote and develop the basic knowledge of physics and its applications, and to encourage scientific research and teaching of physics in all reaches of education. The RSEF operates on a national scale and maintains international relations with other societies with similar aims, including Iberoamerican societies. More details and the statues of the RSEF can be found on its website, http://rsef.es/
The RSEF is structured into specialsed groups and division (for different areas of physics), such as the Condensed Matter Division and local sections (grouping members in different parts of Spain). It also includes a foreign section for members of the RSEF who pursue their activity outside Spain.
The main aims of the RSEF are:

To transmit, to society and institutions alike, the importance of physics in enhancing citizens’ knowledge, the country's economy, and its social progress.
To promote research, teaching, and outreach in physics.
To be a national reference in everything relating to physics sciences and technologies.
To be the institutional advisory body for all matters concerning physics to the corresponding authorities.
To take part in setting up nationwide scientific committees, and to join Spanish representations at international scientific institutions and commissions.
To assess and work closely with the business sector on issues relating to physics.
To contribute to scientific and technological education in society at large through the promotion of activities designed to strengthen the dissemination and outreach of physics, including the National and International Physics Olympiads.
To enable interactions among individuals, institutions, and organisations with an interest in physics and, most especially, among members of the RSEF.
RSEF membership may consist of:

Members: individuals, without restriction in number or nationality.
Corporate members: these may be Institutional Members (for instance, teaching or research institutions) or Business Companies collaborating with the RSEF or supporting its aims.
The RSEF is a member of the European Physical Society (EPS), the Federation of Iberoamerican Physics (FEIASOFI), and the Confederation of Scientific Societies of Spain (COSCE) maintaining cooperation agreements with other national and international societies such as the American Physical Society (APS) or the Portuguese Physical Society (Sociedade Portuguesa de Física, SPF).